feat(docs): Update New Behavior Guide (#3107)
zmkfirmware/zmk: docs/docs/development/new-behavior.mdx

## Overview

> Behaviors refer to the actions that are invoked when a key is pressed or released.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Behaviors](../keymaps/behaviors/index.mdx) refer to the actions that are invoked when a key is pressed or released.
```

This guide outlines how to create a [ZMK module](../development/module-creation.md) that contains a new [behavior](../keymaps/behaviors/index.mdx).

:::info
If an out-of-tree behavior's use-case is deemed widespread enough to be merged into upstream ZMK, a new pull request may be issued instead.
While this page describes practices that maximize compatibility between module-focused development and pull-request-based workflows, we also note specific modifications required for the latter to work properly.
:::

In the context of the Zephyr RTOS, behaviors are implemented as "devices", which contain:

> - A devicetree binding file, which declare behavior's properties

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- A devicetree binding file, which declares behavior's properties
```

- A device driver written in C code
- Optionally, devicetree-source-include files (`.dtsi`), which contain instances of the behavior that may be included directly in keymaps, rather than being explicitly defined in a `behaviors` node

The general process for developing behaviors is:

> 1. [Create a new behavior repository](#creating-a-new-behavior-repository)

Reviewer: I think it might be better to just leave the top-level items here, what do you think? This looks too much like a ToC.

:::

## Creating a new Behavior Repository

### Initializing a new Behavior Module

1. Navigate to [the ZMK module template repository](https://github.com/zmkfirmware/zmk-module-template)
1. Select **"Use this template"** in the upper right corner, followed by **"Create a new repository"**
1. Choose an appropriate name for your new repository.
   ZMK behavior modules should follow the naming convention, **`zmk-behavior-<name-of-behavior>`**, using all lowercase letters and dashes to separate words
1. Complete the module's creation by selecting the repository's visibility, before clicking **"Create repository"**
1. Clone a copy of your module to your development environment.

>    It is easiest if your behavior resides in the same folder as your copy of the ZMK source code, as shown in the tree below.

Author: I think I initially wanted to include a section to prompt the user to include it as an extra module when building/testing.

https://zmk.dev/docs/development/local-toolchain/build-flash#building-with-external-modules

Though in hindsight, since building with extra modules requires an absolute path, there's no real incentive to place it near the ZMK source code.

>    It is easiest if your behavior resides in the same folder as your copy of the ZMK source code, as shown in the tree below.

Author: Perhaps a better version would be:
```
1. Clone a copy of your module to your development environment.
   The cloned repository should be easily accessible when [building and testing firmware using a local toolchain](./local-toolchain/build-flash.mdx#building-with-external-modules).
```
Thoughts?

└── zmk-behavior-<name-of-behavior>
```

Files unrelated to behavior development should be removed from your copy of the ZMK module template.
The minimum viable filesystem for a behavior follows the following structure:

```
zmk-behavior-<name-of-behavior>/
├── CMakeLists.txt
├── Kconfig
├── LICENSE
├── README.md
├── dts
│   ├── behaviors
// highlight-next-line
│   │   └── <name_of_behavior>.dtsi (optional)
│   └── bindings
│       └── behaviors
// highlight-next-line
│           └── zmk,behavior-<name-of-behavior>.yaml
├── include
│   └── dt-bindings
│       └── zmk
// highlight-next-line
│           └── <name_of_behavior>.h (optional)
├── src
│   └── behaviors
// highlight-next-line
│       └── behavior_<name_of_behavior>.c
// highlight-start
├── tests
│   └── <name_of_behavior>
│       ├── behavior_keymap.dtsi
│       └── normal
│           ├── events.patterns
│           ├── keycode_events.snapshot
│           ├── native_posix.keymap
│           └── native_posix_64.keymap
// highlight-end
// highlight-next-line
├── west.yml (optional)
└── zephyr
    └── module.yml
```

For more information on module preparation, refer to the page on [module creation](./module-creation.md).

> This is especially the case for procedures involving the `west.yml` and `zephyr/module.yml` files.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For more information on module preparation, such as details on `west.yml` and `zephyr/module.yml` contents, refer to the page on [module creation](./module-creation.md).
```

<Tabs
defaultValue="single"
values={[
{label: 'Behavior template with single instantiation', value: "single"},
{label: 'Behavior template with multiple instantiation', value: "multiple"},
]}>
<TabItem value="single">

```c title="src/behaviors/behavior_<name_of_behavior>.c"
/*
 * Copyright (c) XXXX The ZMK Contributors
 *
 * SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
 */

#define DT_DRV_COMPAT zmk_<name_of_behavior>

// Dependencies
#include <zephyr/device.h>
#include <zephyr/logging/log.h>
#include <drivers/behavior.h>

LOG_MODULE_DECLARE(zmk, CONFIG_ZMK_LOG_LEVEL);

#include <zmk/behavior.h>

#if DT_HAS_COMPAT_STATUS_OKAY(DT_DRV_COMPAT)

// Instance-specific Data struct (Optional)
struct behavior_<name_of_behavior>_data {
    bool data_param1;
    bool data_param2;
    bool data_param3;
};

// Instance-specific Config struct (Optional)
struct behavior_<name_of_behavior>_config {
    bool config_param1;
    bool config_param2;
    bool config_param3;
};

// Initialization Function (Optional)
static int <name_of_behavior>_init(const struct device *dev) {
    return 0;
};

// API struct
static const struct behavior_driver_api <name_of_behavior>_driver_api = {

> 

Reviewer: Yes, in addition to adding `on_<name_of_behavior>_binding_pressed` etc. function stubs above that can be empty, or just return opaque.

> 

Author: I like this idea. Thanks for the suggestion!

This ensures that behavior-specific properties may be accessed without explicitly enabling the behavior in a keyboard's `.conf` or `defconfig` files.

```Kconfig title="KConfig"
config ZMK_BEHAVIOR_<NAME_OF_BEHAVIOR>
    bool
    default y
    depends on DT_HAS_ZMK_BEHAVIOR_<NAME_OF_BEHAVIOR>_ENABLED

if ZMK_BEHAVIOR_<NAME_OF_BEHAVIOR>

config ZMK_BEHAVIOR_<NAME_OF_BEHAVIOR>_PROPERTY1
    <bool | string | hex | int>
    help <Explanation of property 1>

config ZMK_BEHAVIOR_<NAME_OF_BEHAVIOR>_PROPERTY2
    <bool | string | hex | int>
    help <Explanation of property 2>

config ZMK_BEHAVIOR_<NAME_OF_BEHAVIOR>_PROPERTY3
    <bool | string | hex | int>
    help <Explanation of property 3>

endif #ZMK_BEHAVIOR_<NAME_OF_BEHAVIOR>
```

:::info
For an overview on KConfig files, see [Configuration](../config/index.md#kconfig-files).

For more examples of behavior-specific KConfig settings, see [Behavior Configuration](../config/behaviors.md).
:::

### Updating `CMakeLists.txt`

`CMakeLists.txt` files are used in Zephyr's [**configuration stage**](https://docs.zephyrproject.org/3.5.0/build/cmake/index.html) when building firmware.

> This is what allows us to specify which source files to include, which may depend on the KConfig settings shown previously.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These specify which source files are included in the build, and may depend on the KConfig settings shown previously.
```

Other common ways of enabling/blocking the inclusion of sources via `CMakeLists.txt` include:

| Condition                                                            | CMakeLists.txt entry                                                                                                                              |
| -------------------------------------------------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| Locality is unibody, Central side of split, peripheral side of split | if ((NOT CONFIG_ZMK_SPLIT) OR CONFIG_ZMK_SPLIT_ROLE_CENTRAL)                                                                                      |
| Locality is **only** on the central unit of a split keyboard         | if (CONFIG_ZMK_SPLIT AND CONFIG_ZMK_SPLIT_ROLE_CENTRAL)                                                                                           |
| Locality is **only** on the peripheral unit of a split keyboard      | if (CONFIG_ZMK_SPLIT AND (NOT CONFIG_ZMK_SPLIT_ROLE_CENTRAL))                                                                                     |

> | KConfig Requirement must be met                                      | Use `target_sources_ifdef(CONFIG_<Configuration Requirement> app PRIVATE <name_of_behavior>.c)` instead of `target_sources(<name_of_behavior>.c)` |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Locality is unibody, or the central part of split | `if ((NOT CONFIG_ZMK_SPLIT) OR CONFIG_ZMK_SPLIT_ROLE_CENTRAL)`                                                                                      |
| Locality is **only** on the central part of a split keyboard         | `if (CONFIG_ZMK_SPLIT AND CONFIG_ZMK_SPLIT_ROLE_CENTRAL)`                                                                                           |
| Locality is **only** on the peripheral part of a split keyboard      | `if (CONFIG_ZMK_SPLIT AND (NOT CONFIG_ZMK_SPLIT_ROLE_CENTRAL))`                                                                                     |
| KConfig Requirement must be met                                      | Use `target_sources_ifdef(CONFIG_<Configuration Requirement> app PRIVATE <name_of_behavior>.c)` instead of `target_sources(<name_of_behavior>.c)` |
```
(Will need realigning)
a few changes:
- "part" terminology instead of "unit"
- fixing what I assume is a bug on the first row condition
- code fencing

:::info
If submitting a pull request to upstream ZMK, this `#include` statement would go inside `zmk/app/dts/behaviors.dtsi`, instead of the keymap.
:::

## Developing the Behavior Functionality

### Overview

This section seeks to elaborate on the contents of behavior sources that interact with ZMK directly.
We will review the components from the [behavior source templates](#behavior-source-files-c) in the order they appear and introduce new concepts that are commonly used in the development process.

:::info
Developing drivers for behaviors in ZMK makes extensive use of the Zephyr Devicetree API and Device Driver Model.
Links to the Zephyr Project Documentation for both of these concepts can be found below:

- [Zephyr Devicetree API](https://docs.zephyrproject.org/3.5.0/build/dts/api/api.html)
- [Zephyr Device Driver Model](https://docs.zephyrproject.org/3.5.0/kernel/drivers/index.html)

:::

:::warning
If submitting a pull request, any `.c` files should be formatted according to `clang-format` to ensure that automated checks run smoothly.
:::

### Compatible: `#define DT_DRV_COMPAT`

> This field should match the [`compatible` field of your devicetree binding](#compatible).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This field should match the [`compatible` field of your devicetree binding](#compatible), with commas and hyphens replaced by underscores.
```
It'd be better if we can make it more precise but it's good enough, IMO

#### Optional: Initialization function

Comes in the form `static int <name_of_behavior>_init(const struct device *dev)`.
Initialization functions preconfigure any data, like resetting timers and position for hold-taps and tap-dances.
All initialization functions `return 0;` once complete.

The **second** cell of `BEHAVIOR_DT_INST_DEFINE` can be set to `NULL` instead if an initialization function is not required.

#### Optional: Data pointers

The data `struct` stores additional data required for **each new instance** of the behavior.
Regardless of the instance number, `n`, `behavior_<name_of_behavior>_data_##n` is typically initialized as an empty `struct`.
The data respective to each instance of the behavior can be accessed in functions like [`on_<name_of_behavior>_binding_pressed(struct zmk_behavior_binding *binding, struct zmk_behavior_binding_event event)`](#dependencies) by extracting the behavior device from the keybind like so:

```c
const struct device *dev = zmk_behavior_get_binding(binding->behavior_dev);
struct behavior_<name_of_behavior>_data *data = dev->data;
```

The variables stored inside the data `struct`, `data`, can be then modified as necessary.

> The **fourth** cell of `BEHAVIOR_DT_INST_DEFINE` can be set to `NULL` instead if instance-specific data is not required.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The **fourth** argument of `BEHAVIOR_DT_INST_DEFINE` can be set to `NULL` instead if instance-specific data is not required.
```

                                     struct zmk_behavior_binding_event event) {
    LOG_DBG("position %d keycode 0x%02X", event.position, binding->param1);
    return raise_zmk_keycode_state_changed_from_encoded(binding->param1, true, event.timestamp);
}

static int on_keymap_binding_released(struct zmk_behavior_binding *binding,
                                      struct zmk_behavior_binding_event event) {
    LOG_DBG("position %d keycode 0x%02X", event.position, binding->param1);
    return raise_zmk_keycode_state_changed_from_encoded(binding->param1, false, event.timestamp);
}

static const struct behavior_driver_api behavior_key_press_driver_api = {
    .binding_pressed = on_keymap_binding_pressed,
    .binding_released = on_keymap_binding_released,
#if IS_ENABLED(CONFIG_ZMK_BEHAVIOR_METADATA)
    .parameter_metadata = &metadata,
#endif // IS_ENABLED(CONFIG_ZMK_BEHAVIOR_METADATA)
};
```

### Layers

All functions that interact with layers can be found in `keymap.h`.

Layers can be identified in two ways: a **order-independent** `zmk_keymap_layer_id_t`, and an `order-dependent` `zmk_keymap_layer_index_t`.

> Additionally, a bitmask, `zmk_keymap_layers_state_t`, is used to keep track of which layers are active or not, based on their **order-independent IDs**.

Reviewer: I think this might be unnecessary; users should use the APIs below to check whether a layer is active instead.

Author: Maybe unnecessary in this particular location but I think it's worth mentioning that the layer state refers to the aggregate state of _all_ layers represented as a bitmask. Perhaps it belongs in the table instead?

```
Layers can be identified in two ways: an "order-independent" `zmk_keymap_layer_id_t`, and an "order-dependent" `zmk_keymap_layer_index_t`.

| Function                                                             | Description                                                                                                                             |
| -------------------------------------------------------------------- | --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `zmk_keymap_layer_default(void)`                                     | Returns a `zmk_keymap_layer_id_t` of the default layer.                                                                                 |
| `zmk_keymap_layer_state(void)`                                       | Returns the current keyboard's layer state: a bitmask where each bit represents the state of the corresponding `zmk_keymap_layer_id_t`. |
```

Reviewer: Yes, I think the function is worth mentioning in the table. :+1:

| `zmk_keymap_layer_active(zmk_keymap_layer_id_t layer)`     | Returns a `bool` representing if the layer with the chosen `zmk_keymap_layer_id_t` is active.                                |
| `zmk_keymap_highest_layer_active(void)`                    | Returns a `zmk_keymap_layer_index_t` the ordered layer index of the highest active layer.                                    |
| `zmk_keymap_layer_activate(zmk_keymap_layer_id_t layer)`   | Activates the chosen layer. Returns 0 if successful. Returns values < 0 if an error occurs.                                  |
| `zmk_keymap_layer_deactivate(zmk_keymap_layer_id_t layer)` | Deactivates the chosen layer. Returns 0 if successful. Returns values < 0 if an error occurs.                                |
| `zmk_keymap_layer_toggle(zmk_keymap_layer_id_t layer)`     | Toggles the chosen layer. Returns 0 if successful. Returns values < 0 if an error occurs.                                    |
| `zmk_keymap_layer_to(zmk_keymap_layer_id_t layer)`         | Deactivates every layer, before activating the chosen layer. Returns 0 if successful. Returns values < 0 if an error occurs. |

> | `zmk_keymap_layer_name(zmk_keymap_layer_id_t layer)`       | Returns a C-string containing the layer's name.                                                                              |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `zmk_keymap_layer_name(zmk_keymap_layer_id_t layer)`       | Returns a C-string containing the layer's name.                                                                              |
| `zmk_keymap_layer_index_to_id(zmk_keymap_layer_index_t layer_index)` | Returns the order-independent ID for a given layer index.                                                                              |
```
I thought this is worth adding given the distinction made above, but feel free to reword

> ### ZMK Event Manager

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### ZMK Events
```

Some common examples of this are determining if one or more key positions have been pressed or released, to check if a specific keycode has been sent, or registering changes between keymap layers.
All events can be found in their headers, stored in `zmk/app/include/zmk/events/`.

To use the event manager, we `#include <zmk/event_manager.h>` at the top of our behavior source file.

Some examples of events that are the most relevant to behavior development can be seen below.

| Event                       | Description                                                                                       |
| --------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `hid_indicators_changed.h`  | The current HID indicators (Num Lock, Caps Lock, Scroll Lock, Compose, Kana) as a bitmask         |
| `keycode_state_changed.h`   | [Keycode events' state (on/off)](#keycodes), usage page, keycode value, modifiers, and timestamps |
| `layer_state_changed.h`     | [Layer events' state (bitmask)](#layers), layer index, and timestamps                             |

> | `modifiers_state_changed.h` | Modifier events' state (on/off) and modifier values                                               |

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```
AFAIK nothing raises this event, so it is not currently working

Reviewer: Yes, AFAIK

| `position_state_changed.h`  | Position events' state (on/off), source, position, and timestamps                                 |

:::info
See the [`events` directory](https://github.com/zmkfirmware/zmk/tree/main/app/include/zmk/events) for other examples of events.
For more information on how to interact with events and the event manager, see [Events](./events.md).
:::

### Interacting with other behaviors and the ZMK Behavior Queue

This section will refer to features found in `behavior.h` and `behavior_queue.h`.

#### `#include <zmk/behavior.h>`

These functions work with behaviors at a **device** level.

> They are used to retrieve the device associateed with a keymap binding, or invoke the behaviors in a parameter list.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
They are used to retrieve the device associated with a keymap binding, or invoke other behaviors, such as ones provided as a parameter to the current behavior.
```

| Function                      | Description                                                     |
| ----------------------------- | --------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `zmk_behavior_get_binding`    | Get a const struct device\* for a behavior from its name field. |
| `zmk_behavior_invoke_binding` | Invoke a behavior given its binding and invoking event details. |

> 

Author: Just to confirm: do you mean `zmk_behavior_binding`, instead of `zmk_behavior_invoke_binding`?

Otherwise, I think it's worth including for more completeness.

#### `#include <zmk/behavior_queue.h>`

The behavior queue is leveraged by [macros](../keymaps/behaviors/macros.md) and [sensor rotation](../keymaps/behaviors/sensor-rotate.md) behaviors.

> This is used to invoke behaviors in sequence with specific timing.

Author: I'm not sure it's on a separate thread but the note that the behavior queue is non-blocking is important. Can isolate the non-blocking section as a mention.

- What does an example implementation in a keymap look like? Include a code-snippet of the example implementation in the keymap file's `behaviors` node.
- How does the behavior perform in edge cases? For example, tap-dances invoke the last binding in its list of `bindings` once the maximum number of keypresses has been reached.

Including visual aids alongside written documentation for additional clarity may be helpful.

:::info
If submitting a pull request, see [Documentation](contributing/documentation.md) for more information on writing, testing, and formatting ZMK documentation.
:::

## Licensing Information

:::danger
The ZMK Project and its contributors do not claim to be legal representatives, and any material below should not considered official legal advice.
When distributing your work, please review the terms and conditions associated with any relevant licenses thoroughly.
:::

Developers may wish to share their work with the public, which is often done by sharing a link to a GitHub repository.
However, making a repository public does **not** automatically qualify the repository as open source, or permit others to use the works as they see fit.

> Author must provide a license that in addition to their source code, satisfy criteria that includes but is not limited to:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Authors should provide a license that in addition to their source code, ideally satisfies criteria that includes but is not limited to:
```
I softened this a bit, am I missing anything about the "must" clause?

Author: The "must" clause is specifically for qualifying the module as open source. 
https://opensource.org/osd
https://opensource.guide/legal/

Was trying to steer readers towards the open-source route given ZMK's disposition by setting up this sentence with the previous statement on public != open source

Consider the following prompts when writing documentation for new behaviors:

- What does it do? Describe some general use-cases for the behavior.
- Which properties included in the [devicetree binding](#devicetree-bindings-yaml) should be configured manually by the user? What do they do, and if applicable, what are their default values?
- What does an example implementation in a keymap look like? Include a code-snippet of the example implementation in the keymap file's `behaviors` node.
- How does the behavior perform in edge cases? For example, tap-dances invoke the last binding in its list of `bindings` once the maximum number of keypresses has been reached.

Including visual aids alongside written documentation for additional clarity may be helpful.

:::info
If submitting a pull request, see [Documentation](contributing/documentation.md) for more information on writing, testing, and formatting ZMK documentation.
:::

> ## Updating Copyright Information

Author: Also agreed. Will workshop this section a bit more with that in mind.
